JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour"
tonight: Brexit begins.
Prime Minister Theresa May gives
formal notice, starting the
two-year process of Britain's
divorce from the European Union.
Then: The invisible wounds of
war -- why so many veterans
struggle to get past the stigma
of PTSD in order to
get the help they need.
SGT.
MAYA MARSHALL (RET.), U.S.
Army: A lot of times, I did
say, OK, well maybe it is my
emotions.
Maybe I do just need to push
those aside and just toughen
up and just move forward and
drive on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And restoring
Florida's Everglades - -
why the ailing wetlands
are at the center
of a complex political
and scientific battle.
MICHAEL GRUNWALD, Author, "The
Swamp: The Everglades, Florida
and the Politics of Paradise":
It's covered in this flocculant
glop that looks like guacamole
and smells like crap.
And that's not just an
environmental problem.
That's an economic
catastrophe for that area.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The clock is
ticking tonight on Britain's
withdrawal from the European
Union.
London got things started
today, nine months after the
British people voted to quit the
political and economic bloc.
Our chief foreign affairs
correspondent, Margaret
Warner, begins our coverage.
THERESA MAY, British Prime
Minister: In accordance
with the wishes of the
British people, the
United Kingdom is leaving
the European Union.
MARGARET WARNER: With that,
the British government
formally launched the process.
First, Britain's ambassador to
the European Union delivered
official notice to its president
in Brussels.
Then, Prime Minister Theresa
May addressed Parliament.
THERESA MAY: This is an
historic moment from which
there can be no turning back.
Britain is leaving
the European Union.
We are going to make our own
decisions and our own laws.
MARGARET WARNER: Reaction on the
street was as mixed today as it
was in last June's referendum,
which passed 52 to 48 percent.
MIKE PIPER, Great Britain:
I said to my wife, all
I want to do before I
die is see my country
free of the shackles of Europe.
NICOLA GIBSON, Great Britain:
No one how this is going to go.
It's a gamble.
It's a risk.
It's a bit like -- it's just
an uncertain place at moment.
MARGARET WARNER: But
the European Council
president, Donald Tusk,
lamented the occasion.
DONALD TUSK, European Council
President: There is no reason
to pretend that this is a happy
day, neither in
Brussels nor in London.
MARGARET WARNER: Then-Prime
Minister David Cameron called
last year's Brexit referendum,
hoping it would fail, and
boost his Conservative
Party's prospects in the
next general election.
But after the surprise
result, Cameron stepped down,
leaving its execution to May.
The U.K. has two years to
hammer out the specific
of its withdrawal from
the 27-nation bloc.
But face-to-face talks
aren't expected to get
under way until late May.
And the negotiations
promise to be tough.
British Finance Minister Philip
Hammond said he expects some
give and take, but added:
PHILIP HAMMOND, British Finance
Minister: I'm confident, as
we have explored over the
last nine months with
our E.U. partners, that
we have a sufficient
meeting of minds on this
issue, that we will be able
to reach a deal that will
work for us and work for them.
MARGARET WARNER: As for
the U.S., then-candidate
Donald Trump praised Brexit.
Today, his White House
spokesman commented.
SEAN SPICER, White House Press
Secretary: Whatever future
the U.K.-E.U. relationship
looks like, we want
the U.K. to remain a
strong leader in Europe.
MARGARET WARNER: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Margaret Warner.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will hear
from the British ambassador to
Washington right after the news
summary.
In the day's other news: The
U.S. military announced that its
review of a disputed airstrike
in Iraq is now a
formal investigation.
Local officials in Mosul say
the March 17 strike killed
at least 100 civilians.
Today, the top U.S. American
commander for the Middle East,
General Joseph Votel, appeared
at a congressional hearing.
He said the investigation will
examine a number of factors.
GEN.
JOSEPH VOTEL, Commander, U.S.
Central Command: This was a
very dynamic situation, so this
wasn't a deliberate
target or anything else.
This was an evolving combat
situation, so we will take a
look at the intelligence that
was provided to us by
the Iraqis that we had.
We will look at the enemy's
reaction here, and we will try
to understand exactly their
role in this.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Votel also said
the Islamic State is using
human shields in Mosul, in
an effort to exploit
American concerns about
killing civilians.
Still, President Trump told
lawmakers last night -- and I
quote -- "We are doing really
well in Iraq."
China and the European Union
today stood by their commitments
to the Paris accord on climate
change.
That follows President Trump's
actions aimed at rolling back
the push for deep cuts in
U.S. greenhouse gas emissions.
In Beijing, a Chinese Foreign
Ministry spokesman said that his
government is not changing its
stance.
LU KANG, Chinese Foreign
Ministry Spokesman
(through translator):
We still believe the
Paris agreement was hard-won.
The international community,
including China and
the United States, made
positive contributions.
All sides should move with the
times, grasp the opportunities,
fulfill their promises
and earnestly take proactive
steps to jointly push the
enforcement of this agreement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Meanwhile, the
European Union voiced regret
about President Trump's move.
The president formally
launched a new commission
on opioid abuse today.
He heard from recovering
addicts and others.
The group included New Jersey
Governor Chris Christie, who
will chair the commission.
Meanwhile, in Newark, two
former aides to Christie were
sentenced to prison for causing
huge traffic jams
on a major bridge.
The move was aimed at a
Democratic mayor who'd
refused to endorse Christie.
The president's daughter Ivanka
said today that she will serve
as an unpaid federal employee.
In a statement, Ivanka Trump
said she's taking that step to
address ethics questions that
were raised after an earlier
announcement that she'd be an
informal adviser to her father,
with an office in
the White House.
As a federal employee,
she's obliged to comply with
government ethics rules.
And, on Wall Street, energy
stocks were up, banks stocks
were down, and the indexes were
mixed.
The Dow Jones industrial
average lost 42 points
to close at 20659.
The Nasdaq rose 22 points,
and the S&P 500 added two.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Brexit officially begins -- I
speak with the U.K.'s ambassador
to the U.S.; the uncertain
prospects of finding
common ground in Congress;
horrific conditions
in Bangladesh's leather
tanneries; and much more.
Now we return to Brexit and
Great Britain's official move
today to begin the process of
leaving the European Union.
I spoke a short time ago with
the British ambassador to the
United States, Sir Kim Darroch.
And I began by asking if he
thinks the head of the European
Union, Donald Tusk, was right
when he said this is not a
happy day in London or Brussels.
SIR KIM DARROCH, British
Ambassador to the United States:
I wouldn't put it like that,
Judy.
This was a clear democratic
decision by the British people,
52 percent to 48 percent on
that famous day,
June 23 last year.
And it's now about
delivering what the
British people asked for.
So, for me, it's an outcome
of democracy, it's a decision.
And we now need to get
the best possible deal
for the British people.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, when Mr.
Tusk says it's not a win for
either side, that it's more
about damage control,
what would you -- how
would you describe it?
SIR KIM DARROCH: Well, I think
it's an opportunity for us to
establish, as the prime minister
said today, a deep and lasting
and serious partnership with
the European Union, which
covers security issues,
which covers economic
issues, and which has at its
heart a new comprehensive
free trade agreement, which
will be a huge benefit to both
sides of the negotiations,
both to the U.K. and
to the European Union.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I want to ask
you about the prime minister's
letter to Mr. Tusk today,
to the European Union.
Among others things, she
referenced rising protectionist
instincts around the world.
She mentioned security
worries across Europe.
She talked about weakening
-- she said, "Weakening
our cooperation would
be a costly mistake."
That seems to contradict
the very idea of leaving.
Why leave the union
if these are concerns?
SIR KIM DARROCH: Well, the
British people wanted to leave
the European Union, for a
number of reasons, which
people will be analyzing
for some time to come.
But I think regaining control
of our borders and restoring
the full sovereignty of the
British Parliament were
big parts in that decision.
But the point about the
proposition that we are
putting to the European
Union in the prime
minister's letter is
that, as committed free
traders and people who
believe in open markets,
we think we can have
a comprehensive free
trade arrangement with
the European Union
that will be of great
benefit to both sides.
So, it doesn't have
to be lose-lose.
It can be win-win.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The
prime minister, also a
couple of points in the
letter, she referred
to what she called a deep
and special partnership that
Britain desires with the E.U.
And to turn that question
around, why would the E.U. want
a special partnership with a
country that has just said,
we want no part of you?
SIR KIM DARROCH: Well,
we didn't say that.
We say that we're leaving the
European Union because that's
the decision the British people
took, but we're
not leaving Europe.
And we're part of Europe
geographically, and
we're going to continue
to be part of Europe's
future in terms of the
challenges Europe faces,
security, economic
development and so on.
And, look, we're the sixth
biggest economy in the world and
a huge market for the European
Union to send its goods,
its manufactured goods,
its products into.
And I believe they will find
it very much in their interest
to come to an agreement
with us which allows the
freest possible access for
those -- all those exports.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think people
want to understand how this new
relationship is going to work.
And the prime minister today,
again, in the letter spoke of
a bold and ambitious, in her
words, fair trade agreement
between the U.K. and the E.U.
How is that going to
be different from the
current relationship?
SIR KIM DARROCH: Well, as she
also has said in Parliament
today, while we're in the single
market, we are part of the
body that makes the rules of
the single market, decisions
about regulation and
that kind of thing.
We accept that, as we leave
the single market, we will no
longer be in that position, but
that doesn't stop us having
access, as full access as we
can negotiate for both sides,
for them into the U.K. and
for us into Europe, for
our goods and our services.
So, that's the objective.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How worried are
you and others in the leadership
of the British government
about the economic cost to
Great Britain, jobs being moved
out of the country, companies
moving out,
businesses, employers?
SIR KIM DARROCH: I mean, so
far, since the decision of 23
June last year, actually, the
British economy has thrived.
And we have the second highest
growth -- highest rate in the
G7 last year, and it's looking
good again this year.
We have had one of the strongest
economies amongst the major
countries for some time
now.
So, I'm confident
about the future.
And I think that, if we can
achieve the sort of objectives
the prime minister's set out,
it can be to our benefit and
to Europe's benefit as well.
Conversely, you know, if we
weren't to get the kind of
free trade arrangements that we
enjoy now and that we hope to
get to a free trade agreement
in the future, it would damage
both sides.
I don't see the sense in
arriving at an outcome that
is damaging to both sides.
So, I'm hopeful about
progress in this negotiation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally, let me
ask you about the comment from
the White House press secretary,
Sean Spicer, today.
He said, whatever future
the U.K.-E.U. relationship
looks like, he said, we
want the U.K. to continue
to be a strong leader in Europe.
Is that possible under
these circumstances?
SIR KIM DARROCH: We are,
apart from being a very open
economy, and a great leader in
free trade, we're also engaged
in -- all over the world, we
have our military in over 70
countries around the world.
And we're big players, for
example, in the action against
Da'esh in Iraq and Syria and
Libya.
And that's all
going to continue.
Indeed, we may do
more in the future.
So, I think everything
points to us continuing
to be big international
players and very strong
allies for the United States.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sir Kim Darroch,
the British ambassador to
the United States, thank you
very much.
SIR KIM DARROCH: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back on this side
of the Atlantic, some of the
political spotlight was on the
battle over filling the vacant
seat on the U.S. Supreme Court
As Republicans push for a
vote as soon as possible for
President Trump's appointee,
Neil Gorsuch, and Democrats
grow increasingly vocal in
their opposition, the Republican
and Democratic leaders in the
Senate today stood their ground.
SEN.
MITCH MCCONNELL (R-KY), Majority
Leader: So when we hear our
Democratic colleagues talking
about breaking longstanding
precedent to oppose
this noncontroversial,
outstanding judge by
mounting the first ever
purely partisan filibuster
to try to defeat his
nomination, we can only
assume one thing.
This isn't about
the nominee at all.
SEN.
CHUCK SCHUMER (D-NY), Minority
Leader: If Judge Gorsuch
fails to earn 60 votes, and
fails to demonstrate he is
mainstream enough to sit on the
highest court, we should change
the nominee, not the rules.
The Republicans are the ones
making the choice to go nuclear.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more on
this and what is next after
the failed Obamacare repeal and
replace push, and the drama
over the Russia connection
investigation, we turn to Karine
Jean-Pierre.
She's a senior adviser
for MoveOn.org.
And Matt Schlapp, he's chair of
the American Conservative Union.
And welcome back to both
of you to the program.
Karine, I'm going
to start with you.
You have listened
to these senators.
You know what's going
on in the background.
What does it look like
this Gorsuch nomination
is headed towards?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE, Democratic
Strategist: I have to say,
truer words couldn't have been
spoken by Mitch McConnell.
He's absolutely right.
We are in a -- this country,
our democracy is being certainly
threatened, I should say,
and we have a president
who's under investigation
- - well, his associates
are under investigation.
And until that is cleared up,
we should figure out what's
going on and get to the bottom
of it.
And we shouldn't be allowing
a lifetime appointment to
the Supreme Court justice.
So, I totally agree.
There is something -- it's
not just about the nominee.
It's about where we
are as a country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But,
Matt -- excuse me.
I'm sorry to interrupt.
But, Matt, it sounds like
Leader McConnell is not prepared
to slow this thing down.
MATT SCHLAPP, Former White
House Director of Political
Affairs: Not at all.
Neil Gorsuch is going to
be on the Supreme Court.
Everybody knows it.
The question is, do they mount
this filibuster and do the
rules of the Senate have to be
changed to get him on the court?
I predict that they won't
have to change the rules
to get him on the court.
He will get over 50
votes, mostly because...
JUDY WOODRUFF: In other words,
you're saying Democrats, some
Democrats will come on board?
MATT SCHLAPP: I think
-- or they won't choose
to mount a filibuster.
Remember, we don't --
modern times, they don't
use the filibuster against
Supreme Court nominees.
This is quite a precedent.
Now, it plays into what Harry
Reid did in not allowing the
60-vote threshold for nominees
of President Barack Obama.
So, what's happening in the
Senate is it's turning into
something more like the House,
where it just takes a majority
vote to get - - and, of
course, the Senate only handles
nominations, but just a majority
vote to get people through.
And, quite frankly,
as a conservative, I'm
just fine with that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, it
would be a much more partisan
place if that happens, right?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Right.
Hey, I think, if Mitch McConnell
brings Gorsuch to the floor,
and he can't get to 60 votes,
hey, there is another nominee
named Merrick Garland who
waited -- he waited 293 days.
(CROSSTALK)
MATT SCHLAPP: He did.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: But
the Republicans didn't
have any problem with that.
This seat has been
open for over a year.
Why can we not wait to see
where this investigation goes?
MATT SCHLAPP: I think
because it has nothing to
do with the investigation.
It has to do with the fact that
that opening, which was the
swing seat, happened in relative
proximity to the election.
And the Republicans made the
case that we shouldn't make
that decision on that swing
justice until the
election was decided.
The election was decided.
And now Donald Trump has picked
somebody who we have to all
admit performed very well during
the hearings.
And even the Democrats I have
talked to said it would have
helped our cause a lot if he
seemed to be less sure-footed.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE:
But here's the thing.
Merrick Garland was a
consensus candidate that
Republicans should have been...
(CROSSTALK)
MATT SCHLAPP: So is
Neil Gorsuch, though.
(CROSSTALK)
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE:
No, he's not.
He never even answered questions
about how he voted when it
came to women's rights, when
it came to LGBT rights.
He actually didn't even
answer those questions.
MATT SCHLAPP: He said that he
-- his opinions didn't matter.
What mattered is the
black letter of the law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All
right, we're not going to
resolve this in this week.
We may try at it --
we may go at it again.
(LAUGHTER)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly, the
Intelligence Committee, Matt,
chairman of House Intelligence
Committee, Devin Nunes, a lot
of controversy, questions about
whether he can be a credible
leader for that investigation.
Where do you see that going?
Today, he and other
Republicans in the House
and even Republicans in
the Senate are saying
this is going to stay as it is.
MATT SCHLAPP: My hat's
off to Democrats.
I think they're doing a good
job of trying to make it about
Devin Nunes and about the
judgments he's made as chairman.
I have talked to the chairman
and his team over the course
of the last days and weeks.
And the information that he
believes that he's uncovered
doesn't have -- doesn't relate
to Russia.
The reason why he went
to the White House
doesn't relate to Russia.
But it does relate to the fact
that he's got more witnesses
who have come forward to say
that, during the ending days
of the Obama administration
or ending weeks and months,
that there was more surveillance
that captured even more
conversations of team Trump.
This is all going to come out.
We're going to see it publicly.
And the American people
are going to be faced
with this question about,
is this surveillance
power that a president
has, is it too broad?
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, this sounds
like, Karine, something that's
just going to get bigger.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Yes, it
definitely seems like it's
just going to get bigger.
Look, we -- from --
historically, both the
House and the Senate,
when it comes to the
Intelligence Committee, it
behaves above board, outside of
politics, which is the beauty of
these two committees.
But we haven't seen
that from this chair.
He continuously does
things that's troubling.
And I'm not just saying
this as a progressive.
You had Senator McCain say,
hey, his behavior last week was
troubling, that you cannot trust
what's going on.
They have lost their
credibility, the
House Intel Committee.
I mean, that...
(CROSSTALK)
MATT SCHLAPP: Good old Senator
McCain, you can always count
on him to criticize his own
team.
He's pretty good at
that, I have to say.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Hey,
he's pretty credible as well.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
two other things I want
to quickly ask you both.
It's a lot, I know, to cram in.
But, Karine, health care, the
attempt to repeal and replace,
didn't come up for a vote.
Republicans seem
to have regrouped.
Do you think Democrats
are prepared to work with
the president on this?
What do you see?
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: I can't
imagine that's going to happen.
And I will tell you why.
What they put forth 20 days
ago now was very draconian.
It was pretty unbelievable
that they had seven years, and
this is what they came up with,
which is a bill that took
health care away from tens of
millions of people, raised costs
for the most vulnerable,
including seniors.
And so I can't imagine
that what -- what are they
were going to come up with?
Why should we trust them, when
they had years to put something
forth that would be appeasing,
or why not just work with the
Democrats and say, hey, we know
that Obamacare needs fixing,
let's work with you guys?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Where
do you see it going?
MATT SCHLAPP: I think you make
a lot of good points there.
We did run around the country
for six or seven years and said
Obamacare was an abomination
and we have a replacement.
But we look bad when the
first attempt to have a repeal
and replace, we stumbled and
couldn't get the votes.
And I don't even think they were
that close to getting the votes.
Look, I think, when you have
a mandate in Obamacare says
you must get health insurance,
and then when you take
the mandate away, there
is no question there
will be people -- it's
called freedom -- who will
choose -- as a young man, I
didn't get health insurance.
People have a right
to make that choice.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Just quickly,
Matt, do you think the
Republicans will try again?
MATT SCHLAPP: I do.
I think the White House
is already working to try
to get something done.
They realize, Judy, we cannot
credibly go back to the voters
next November without having
a real vigorous
replacement of Obamacare.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In less than
30 seconds, the announcement
by the president's daughter,
Matt and Karine, that she will
be an unpaid federal government
employee with an office
in the White House.
MATT SCHLAPP: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We now have
the president's daughter and
son-in-law with offices in the
West Wing.
Unusual.
What should we...
MATT SCHLAPP: It's unusual.
Let's all be honest.
It's unconventional.
But here's what I have learned
in working for a president.
Presidents will seek out the
advice that they feel like they
need to make the tough calls.
And I think it's clear, with
President Trump, his family
is very important to him as he
determines positions on issues.
And I think it's very candid
that he wants her near him
to talk about these things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE:
I think it plays into
the story of nepotism.
And what are the ethics
around all of this?
And it's troubling.
I think it's
incredibly troubling.
And it is going
to be problematic.
MATT SCHLAPP: Her lawyer is
a Democrat, Jamie Gorelick.
And there's no legal question.
But there is a question
about the politics of it.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE:
I understand that.
But I understand that.
Well, the optics
are certainly bad.
But the only reason we
heard an announcement
of what her position is
going to be is because
they were responding to
watchdogs, saying, hey,
this doesn't look good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And now she says
she will be a formal government
employee, subject to ethics
rules.
All these...
MATT SCHLAPP: And
she's a Democrat.
For all those Democrats who
were complaining, you might like
the fact that she's in there.
(LAUGHTER)
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE: Well,
I think she's an enabler.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank
you both, Karine
Jean-Pierre, Matt Schlapp.
MATT SCHLAPP: Thank you.
KARINE JEAN-PIERRE:
Thank you so much, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Nearly four years
ago, an industrial building in
Bangladesh collapsed, killing
more than 1,100 people,
highlighting the dangers
faced by workers in the
textile industry there.
What's much less known are
the conditions in the leather
industry in Bangladesh,where
workers are exposed to toxic
chemicals, and where the waste
has created one of the world's
dirtiest manufacturing sites.
Producer Justin Kenny
and photojournalist
Larry Price traveled to
the country's capital,
Dhaka, for an inside look.
The report was produced in
partnership with the Pulitzer
Center on Crisis Reporting.
And Hari Sreenivasan narrates.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Setting foot
in the Hazaribagh neighborhood
is an assault on the senses.
The scene is seemingly
post-apocalyptic, the
stench overwhelming and
almost vomit-inducing,
a combination of garbage,
human waste, rotting animal
hides and toxic chemicals.
The source of those hides and
chemicals are tanneries like
these, hundreds of them packed
into two square miles.
The facilities are often
dark and suffocating.
Workers rarely wear protective
gear, and it doesn't take
long to find children toiling
away in dangerous conditions.
In earlier December,
local media reported
that two 12-year-old
workers were severely
burned at a wallet factory
in the neighborhood.
Our team found this 10-year-old
boy working in plain sight,
despite the fact that Bangladesh
prohibits work by anyone
under 18 at a tannery.
RICHARD PEARSHOUSE, Human
Rights Watch: The children are
doing the most dangerous and
most hazardous types of
work that's possible in the
tanneries, just like the adults.
The children are in the pits
working with chemicals, in
essentially vats full of acid.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Richard
Pearshouse of Human Rights
Watch has made regular
visits to Hazaribagh
and was the lead author of a
2012 report on the district.
RICHARD PEARSHOUSE: Each time,
I would spend a period of time
in Hazaribagh, seven days,
10 days, I would fall sick with
some of the illnesses I was
witnessing in the people who
were living there
and working there.
It's hard to overstate how
polluted Hazaribagh is.
It's a residential area, where
tens of thousands of people are
living, but it's a cluster of
about 200 leather tanneries
who are operating sometimes 24
hours a day with huge amounts
of hazardous chemicals.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
Bangladeshi government
has acknowledged that
21,000 cubic meters
of untreated tannery wastewater
is dumped every day into the
Buriganga River that runs
through Dhaka, one of
the world's most densely
populated cities.
We were granted permission to
visit inside six tanneries to
see firsthand what conditions
were like.
Unlike workers here in the U.S.,
the Dhaka tannery workers wore
no gloves, goggles, respirator
masks, or boots.
At some locations, they
were found inside vats
filled with chemicals.
And there was no
decontamination process.
Many simply washed
chemicals off their body
with a bucket of water.
ALEXANDER VAN GEEN,
Columbia University:
The tanneries shouldn't
operate in this fashion.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Alexander
Van Geen is a geochemist at
Columbia University who has
worked on groundwater
issues in Bangladesh.
ALEXANDER VAN GEEN: The workers
in the tanneries are exposed to
levels of chemicals, chromium
and others that are not
acceptable and are avoidable.
Action is certainly needed.
HARI SREENIVASAN: That chemical
exposure is leading to both
short- and long-term medical
conditions, according to
Dr. Mir Masudur Rhaman,
who treats tannery workers.
DR.
MIR MASUDUR RHAMAN, Bangladesh:
Lung disease, mainly asthma,
bronchitis, lung cancer, urine
bladder cancer, reproductive
tract infection, and also other
diseases like stomach discomfort
or gastroenteritis.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What's
surprising is that many
workers are left in the
dark about chemicals
that they are exposed to.
This man is in his '50s
and says he's worked in
the industry for 20 years.
QUESTION (through
translator): Are you aware
of the dangerous chemicals
being used in tanneries?
MAN (through translator):
No, I am not aware of them.
QUESTION (through translator):
Do you take any protection
while you're working?
MAN (through translator): No.
HARI SREENIVASAN: He and
other workers we spoke to said
they were happy to have a job
in a country where 40 percent
of the population lives on
less than a $1.25 a day.
But it's not just the workers
who are exposed in Hazaribagh.
Tens of thousands of residents,
including small children
who play in the tanneries'
dumping grounds, encounter the
chemicals in tannery wastewater
that is released untreated
through spouts straight
into neighborhood streams.
RICHARD PEARSHOUSE: That
combination of heavy
chemically intensive
industry in essentially
a densely packed
residential environment
makes for a toxic mix.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Despite being
more than 7,000 miles from the
United States, your connection
to Hazaribagh's nearly
$1-billion-a-year leather
industry could be as
close as your feet, back
pocket or waist.
How can you tell?
Well, oftentimes, you cannot.
HEATHER WHITE, Documentary
Filmmaker: Consumers
have no way of knowing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Heather White,
now a documentary film director
and producer, spent decades
helping major brands source
their products in an ethically
and environmentally responsible
way.
She says that the supply
chain in Bangladesh
and other developing
nations is often tainted
by abusers of environmental
and labor standards.
HEATHER WHITE: It's completely
mission impossible, for customs
inspectors, for consumers, for
people who want to know
transparently what went
on in the production
of the end product,
because the subcontractors'
invoices, shipping
documents, they don't
travel with the shipment.
Brands could
completely require it.
But the brands basically have
no incentive to do so, because
they profit from the fact
that a lot of the stuff is
hidden and consumers aren't
going to know about it.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Perhaps even
more surprising for American
consumers is that the country
of origin made-in labels
frequently don't reveal
the nation or region
where source materials
or goods come from.
HEATHER WHITE: For example, they
could primarily sourced from
Asia, but if the finishing was
done in a factory in Italy,
it's going to come into the
U.S. with a made in Italy or
a made in Europe label.
HARI SREENIVASAN: White and
others attribute the economic
growth of Bangladesh's leather
industry to a lack of
enforcement of local laws.
Child labor, lack of protective
equipment for workers and the
dumping of untreated wastewater
are all illegal in the
country, but industry still
operates in the neighborhood.
The tanneries have yet to abide
by a 15-year-old Bangladesh
high court order requiring them
to relocate to an industrial
area on the outskirts
of Dhaka with a common
wastewater treatment
plant.
The plant is not complete.
And the tanneries have been slow
to rebuild operations there.
Some tannery owners say
they don't want to move
because of the cost.
Earlier this month, the high
court ruled again on the issue
and ordered the government to
cut power, gas and
water to the tanneries.
The order was upheld by
the country's Supreme
Court days later.
But the tanneries
are still operating.
RICHARD PEARSHOUSE: So,
essentially, the government
is playing a game where
they say, the tanneries
are on the verge of moving.
We can't enforce our
laws until they move.
And what that decision not
to enforce the laws means is
that the health of the workers
and the local residents
continues to suffer.
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's still
unclear whether the government
will act and if Hazaribagh
will this time finally see
change or more pollution.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan
for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: For the record,
we asked the Bangladesh Embassy
here in Washington repeatedly
for comment.
But they declined.
Now to our special three-night
look at the efforts to treat,
diagnose and possibly find
a cure to post-traumatic
stress disorder.
One in five U.S. military
personnel serving in combat
will suffer some form of PTSD.
But it often goes untreated
because of the stigma
associated with the disorder.
Tonight, special correspondent
Soledad O'Brien begins our
series, War on the Brain.
Almost every day, at some point,
I would relive the IED attack.
It was like I couldn't turn
my mind off, like I was being
flooded, like a cyber-attack,
reliving that explosion
like a broken record.
It just kept playing,
and I couldn't stop it.
COL.
GREG GADSON (RET.), U.S. Army:
I remember I was driving,
and I opened my window, and
I turned my radio up,
and I got it to stop.
It was like it left an imprint
on me, and I didn't even
know where it came from.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Army Colonel
Greg Gadson was blown out
of his passenger's seat by a
roadside bomb.
He was in Baghdad 2007.
His physical injuries were
so severe, doctors assumed he
would suffer from post-traumatic
stress disorder.
But he was too
embarrassed to accept it.
Why did you find it so hard
to really believe that you
had post-traumatic stress?
COL.
GREG GADSON: It wasn't something
that I could identify with.
You know, as an athlete, as a
-- as an officer, as a leader,
we're trained to override pain,
to override doubt.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Both his legs
were amputated above the knee.
He had permanent nerve
damage, limited function
in his right arm.
Gadson underwent 22 surgeries.
He was in rehab for 18 months.
His abilities greatly diminished
from his college glory days.
SPORTS ANNOUNCER: Trying
to get off the pass,
and down he will go.
Great defense by Greg
Gadson, number 98 of
Chesapeake, Virginia.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Gadson
played football at the U.S.
Military Academy at West Point.
Co-captain and outside
linebacker, powering
through was in his DNA.
SPORTS ANNOUNCER: Greg
Gadson right here, he's got
terrific football instincts.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: You're
a football player.
You're a leader.
I mean, you're all these
sort of almost stereotypes,
right, of like the
tough guy in all capital
letters.
COL.
GREG GADSON: Right.
And you can say macho
if you want to say that.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Yes,
OK, I will say macho.
I mean, how much did your
reluctance to get help was that
this macho stereotype was kind
of going to stand
in the way of that?
COL.
GREG GADSON: Probably
100 percent of it.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Yes?
COL.
GREG GADSON: I mean, every
tough challenge in my
life, I fought through.
And that's what I -- and so
I was committed to fighting
through it again, and without
help.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: I was very
surprised that of the one in
five people who get diagnosed
with post-traumatic stress
disorder, like, half of
them don't get treatment.
COL.
GREG GADSON: Right.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: A massive
number just do what you did.
COL.
GREG GADSON: Right.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Stigma
surrounding post-traumatic
stress disorder sometimes
discourages vets
from seeking treatment.
COL.
GREG GADSON: Good boy.
Good.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: The VA's
chief mental health consultant
is Dr. Harold Kudler
DR.
HAROLD KUDLER, Chief Consultant
for Mental Health Services,
Department of Veterans Affairs:
The most important thing to
remove the stigma from PTSD is
for people to talk about it,
but, in talking about it, not
fall into the stereotypes.
For people who have PTSD,
they're at risk for depression,
for substance abuse.
They're at high risk for
suicide, largely because of the
nature of PTSD, to think about
the world and yourself
in negative terms, and
this idea that nothing
could ever go right.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: To get to the
heart of how stigma hinders
treatment, we assembled a panel
of veterans who struggle
with PTSD, with assistance
from the Military
Service Initiative of the
Bush Institute.
They help reintegrate
returning veterans.
Do you think being visibly
wounded made it easier to
have post-traumatic stress?
SGT.
DEWITT OSBORNE (RET.),
U.S. Army: Definitely.
DREW BARNETT (RET.), Former
U.S. Navy SEAL: Absolutely.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Really?
Army Sergeant DeWitt
Osborne received the Purple
Heart for service in Iraq.
SGT.
DEWITT OSBORNE: I think
it's more acceptable when
you have visible wounds.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: It
would make sense to us.
SGT.
DEWITT OSBORNE: It
makes sense, all right?
Ours is hidden.
Doesn't mean we don't suffer
as much, but it's hidden.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Kevin Rosenblum
served five years in the U.S.
army as an infantry officer.
CAPT.
KEVIN ROSENBLUM (RET.),
U.S. Army: As an
officer, as a leader, the
pressure , both internal
and external, to be infallible,
to be strong at all times,
and never show weakness was
there.
And I didn't want to
let my soldiers down.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: In his
first deployment to Iraq,
his unit came under fire.
He received treatment for the
shrapnel in his right leg,
but not for his post-traumatic
stress disorder.
CAPT.
KEVIN ROSENBLUM: I saw a doctor
when I got out, as everybody
does, and just talked through
some things.
And he said, yes, I think you
have post-traumatic stress.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: What
was your reaction?
CAPT.
KEVIN ROSENBLUM: I guess I
just minimized it in my mind
and thought that this is the
toll of service in war.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Special Agent
Drew Barnett, who served with
Navy seals in Afghanistan,
refused to believe
that he had PTSD.
DREW BARNETT: During my early
training in the Navy, one
of our instructors said, you
know, hey, guys, it's better
to die than look stupid.
Just make sure
you don't do both.
And in thinking about that,
I realized that is a lot of
the mind-set that we have, is,
we don't want to, one, look
weak, or we don't want to be
someone who is not dependable.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: And there
is Maya Marshall, part of the
15 percent of service members
who are female.
She left the Army as a
sergeant after five years.
Shame, she says, kept her from
getting help for her symptoms.
SGT.
MAYA MARSHALL (RET.), U.S.
Army: It came from combat, yes,
but, OK, you have only been to
combat one time.
You have only been in the
service for this long.
I felt that they would be
like OK, you're a female.
Just get your feelings out
of it, and just toughen up.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: So, you thought
maybe you didn't deserve it?
SGT.
MAYA MARSHALL: Yes.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: You
hadn't seen enough combat.
SGT.
MAYA MARSHALL: Yes.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: You
hadn't been in long enough.
You're a girl.
SGT.
MAYA MARSHALL: Yes.
(LAUGHTER)
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Maybe you're...
SGT.
MAYA MARSHALL:
Maybe my emotions.
Maybe it is my emotions.
A lot of times, I did say, OK,
well, maybe it is my emotions.
Maybe I do just need to push
those aside and just toughen
up and just move forward and
drive on.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Photography is
Gadson's passion and therapy.
He uses the chair more often
than his prosthetics, so he can
have the freedom to capture his
pictures.
You never use the word
disorder or the D in disorder.
Why not?
COL.
GREG GADSON: Well, D to me is
-- it's a negative label that
doesn't need to be attached.
You know, the face
post-traumatic stress
are those that wear the
uniform, less than 1 percent
of our population.
And so that word can be
associated and labeled with all.
We all have some level
of post-traumatic stress.
Does it make us dysfunctional?
For most of us, I would say not.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Gadson pushed
back hard against his diagnosis,
until his wife intervened.
KIM GADSON, Wife of Col. Greg
Gadson: He threw a number of
mental health professionals out
of his room when he
was in Walter Reed.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN:
He kicked them out?
KIM GADSON: Just kicked them
out, or just chewed them up
and spit them out like they
were nothing.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: What do
you think has helped him
accept a PTS diagnosis
and that he actually
needs help?
KIM GADSON: I think the
fact that it stays with him.
It stays with him.
He's gotten treatment.
He's working at moving
forward on his life.
He's doing a lot of great
things, but every now and
then, there's an episode.
There's something he realizes:
I can't always control this,
so I have to keep working at
it.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN:
Gadson's made progress.
Despite his injuries, he cycles
and occasionally downhill skis.
He tours the country making
dozens of motivational speeches
to soldiers and civilians.
WOMAN: Ladies and gentlemen,
please help me welcome
Colonel Greg Gadson.
(APPLAUSE)
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: Part of his
message: Don't let shame get
in the way of getting help.
COL.
GREG GADSON: For veterans,
what I want to say is, look,
we're always out there for each
other, but you have got
to take the first step.
Display the courage, the courage
that in some cases that you
have displayed in all your
entire military
career, to go get help.
SOLEDAD O'BRIEN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm Soledad O'Brien
in Alexandria, Virginia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, tomorrow,
our series continues with a look
at the challenges of diagnosing
PTSD.
Billions of dollars have
been spent trying to restore
the Florida Everglades.
But there are concerns that
those efforts are not working.
Special correspondent Duarte
Geraldino reports for our weekly
report on the Leading Edge
of science.
EVELYN GAISER, Florida
International University:
This is the microbial
community that forms
the basis of the food
web of the Everglades.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Scientist
Evelyn Gaiser has spent her
entire adult life getting her
feet wet, studying the
microscopic animals
and plants living in
the Florida Everglades.
EVELYN GAISER: There are
so many different types of
habitats that occur in it.
There's so many different ways
that water flows through it,
both above ground and below
ground.
DUARTE GERALDINO:
That complexity hides
a lot of secrets.
EVELYN GAISER: The
ecosystem is changing.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Gaiser
runs the Coastal Everglades
Ecological Research Program.
She and her students
have found previously
unknown life forms here.
EVELYN GAISER: They have
not been discovered in
science, so my students
actively name species.
DUARTE GERALDINO: This
incredibly rare and biodiverse
habitat is also critical to the
survival of birds, reptiles and
ultimately millions of people.
EVELYN GAISER: It is a real
lifeblood, not only for the
organisms that we see here, but
for us as well.
It's our source of fresh
drinking water, of the potable
water that we use and the water
that we irrigate our
farm fields with.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Over the last
century, the natural footprint
of the Everglades was reduced
by almost half to make room
for roads, homes and farms.
To do that, swampland had to
be drained and freshwater was
channeled out to the coasts,
leaving the southern
region vulnerable to rising
seawater encroachment.
EVELYN GAISER: The
saltwater is creeping in.
DUARTE GERALDINO: OK,
so you're saltwater.
I'm freshwater.
EVELYN GAISER: That's right.
And so there's that
kind of push-pull in the
wet and dry season that
would happen naturally.
When you don't have
enough freshwater moving
in, the saltwater is
just going to move in,
in, in, in.
DUARTE GERALDINO: And rising
sea levels, accelerated
by global warming, mean
forests of mangroves
are moving far inland, killing
off the natural habitat.
In 2000, federal lawmakers
implemented an ambitious plan
to restore the original essence
of the Everglades.
After decades of commercial and
agricultural development, the
U.S. government was in effect
trying to broker a deal
between development and nature.
But nature is fighting
back, humbling engineers
and threatening the
drinking water of roughly
eight million people.
HOWARD GONZALES, Comprehensive
Everglades Restoration Plan:
So, what you see behind
you is a water control
structure that's going
to manage the water.
DUARTE GERALDINO:
Howard Gonzales is the
engineer in charge of
implementing the plan, which
is officially called the
Comprehensive Everglades
Restoration Plan, or CERP.
It's a plan designed to build
canals, bridges and reservoirs
to ensure ample drinking water,
protect communities
from flooding, and to
clean and- control water
flow to the Southern
Everglades.
When it was signed into
law, it contained 68
different components at
a cost of $8 billion.
That price tag has now more
than doubled, and not a single
project is complete yet.
Part of the problem is,
there's still so much about the
Everglades we don't understand.
HOWARD GONZALES: The science
has evolved, and we continue to
adaptively manage our program
to meet those new
science understandings.
DUARTE GERALDINO: And yet
Gonzales says the projects are
still proceeding according to
the original timetable.
HOWARD GONZALES: We have nine
projects under construction.
We have at least six of
our foundation projects
that were started back
in the mid-'90s that
are nearing completion.
When you look at those in
total, it shows that we're
making great progress.
DUARTE GERALDINO: The
Tamiami Highway is one
example of that progress.
For nearly 90 years, it
acted like a dam, preventing
freshwater from flowing south to
the Everglades National Park.
Last year, the Army Corps
of Engineers elevated a
one-mile section of the
road and is currently
working to raise two more miles,
so water can flow more freely.
And the state has also built
some stormwater treatment
areas, which use plants to scrub
clean agricultural water before
it flows into the Everglades.
But journalist Michael Grunwald,
author of "The Swamp: The
Everglades, Florida and the
Politics of Paradise,"
says the plan has not
accomplished its main goal.
MICHAEL GRUNWALD, Author, "The
Swamp: The Everglades, Florida
and the Politics of Paradise":
The real thrust of
CERP is supposed to be
about storing water.
And, well, we're 17
years in, and they still
haven't built any storage.
DUARTE GERALDINO: No storage?
MICHAEL GRUNWALD: They
haven't built any storage.
They aren't planning to
build enough storage.
And there's no plan B.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Right
now, the main place to store
water is Lake Okeechobee.
But when water levels get too
high, managers are forced to
release the untreated water,
sending it out to the
east and west coasts.
Last summer, that dirty
water caused unprecedented
algae blooms on Florida's
lakes and coastlines.
It was so bad, Governor
Rick Scott declared
a state of emergency.
MICHAEL GRUNWALD: It's covered
in this flocculant glop that
looks like guacamole and smells
like crap.
And that's not just an
environmental problem.
That's an economic
catastrophe for that area.
DUARTE GERALDINO: So, is this
Nature fighting back now?
MICHAEL GRUNWALD: Mother
Nature gets the last word.
DUARTE GERALDINO: About the
only thing as complex as the
science associated with the
Everglades is its politics.
There is big money,
especially sugar money,
attached to these lands.
PAUL ORSENIGO, Farmer: It's $2.5
billion of economic activity.
DUARTE GERALDINO:
Billion with a B.
Billion with a B --
in Palm Beach County.
DUARTE GERALDINO: Paul Orsenigo
farms lettuce, vegetables and
sugarcane near Belle Glade.
That's the fertile area south
of Lake Okeechobee that was
once part of the Everglades.
PAUL ORSENIGO: We have been
blessed with some of the best
soil types in the whole world
on planet Earth.
And a productive, successful
society and nation, if
you looked at history,
is based on productive
soil and farmland.
DUARTE GERALDINO: But farms
like Orsenigo's may become
part of the storage solution.
To prevent another toxic
algae bloom, a group
of state lawmakers is
proposing the restoration
timetable be sped up and that
farmers give up their land,
so a 60,000-acre reservoir
can be built years ahead of
the original CERP schedule.
The price tag is $2.4 billion.
PAUL ORSENIGO: I think there are
better solutions than buying and
taking more productive farmland.
STEPHEN BASORE, Business Owner:
So, we have about 85 people
that work at this particular
facility.
DUARTE GERALDINO: STEPHEN
BASORE OWNS A FARM AND
VEGETABLE PROCESSING PLANT.
STEPHEN BASORE: Every time
that agricultural land has been
taken out of production, it
gets a lot more challenging
for my family's operation.
DUARTE GERALDINO: He employs up
to 1,000 people at peak season.
STEPHEN BASORE: If you take
agriculture out of here, you're
basically just wiping all
these jobs out, and
there's nothing to
come in and replace it.
DUARTE GERALDINO: He says
Florida farmers have already
given up 100,000 acres of land
that was used to reestablish
wetlands, and they shouldn't
be asked to give more for a
system that is not
fully understood.
Steve Davis, an ecologist with
the Everglades Foundation,
is sympathetic to the loss of
farm jobs, but warns the
state will take an even bigger
economic hit if the problem is
not fixed.
STEPHEN DAVIS,
Everglades Foundations:
We're a tourist-based
economy in Florida.
If people are canceling their
summer vacation trip to these
coastal areas, restaurants,
hotels, a much larger sector of
our economy is being affected.
DUARTE GERALDINO: He says
the science is clear:
More freshwater has to
be stored and channeled
south.
STEPHEN DAVIS: This is the mix
of habitats you would find in
more of a restored or natural
area of the Everglades.
DUARTE GERALDINO: He took us
deep into the marsh, where
alligators are king, to show
us how if, given the right
conditions, this incredibly
rare system can heal itself.
STEPHEN DAVIS: It's almost
like your immune system.
If you get a viral infection,
your body has a tendency to
fight it off, and will continue
to fight it off
as long as it can.
And the resilience
of the Everglades is
very similar to that.
We see the system improves
under marginal conditions.
If we can only restore that
flow of freshwater back to the
south, we know that we will see
a significant boost in
the health of the system.
DUARTE GERALDINO: A system that
is critical to the biological
and economic health of the
entire state of Florida.
From the Everglades,
I'm Duarte Geraldino
for the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
you will want to listen closely.
We explore the sounds
that shaped the cultural
history of America.
Each year, the Library of
Congress selects 25 examples of
audio it considers significant
for the National
Recording Registry.
It's a wide-ranging list, from
Judy Garland singing "Over the
Rainbow" to stand-up comedy
by Richard Pryor.
Our guide is the librarian
of Congress, Carla Hayden.
CARLA HAYDEN, Librarian of
Congress: The registry is
the Library of Congress'
tribute to significant
sound recordings, not only
music, but actually sound
of significant events.
The recordings that are selected
this year and also the over
400 recordings that have
been selected for the registry
over the years are all preserved
and made available at the
Library of Congress' Culpeper
facility, the Packard Center.
The facility curates and also
preserves over four million
items, and more are coming.
There's a combination of comedy.
You have Richard Pryor.
You have jazz, Wes Montgomery.
You have a cylinder that
goes back to 1888 that really
captures what sound recording
was at that time, really
demonstrating we have to
preserve what we hear.
Baseball is one of those
universal American experiences.
And so many people share
time and space and stadiums.
And they also shared it,
as my grandfather did,
listening on the radio.
And what the selection is meant
to represent each year is the
variety of sound recording
and the differences
in different genres.
"Straight Outta Compton"
was performed by a
seminal rap group, NWA.
It was heralded as a song and
a group that made a difference
in terms of that genre being
taken seriously.
Judy Garland, "Over the
Rainbow," I was surprised that
it hadn't been selected already.
And I don't think there are
many people that haven't looked
at either the film or listened
to that song and thought
about Judy Garland singing it.
David Bowie really exemplified
evolution in performance.
And a song that united so
many people, and it's talked
about and used so many times,
"We Are Family"
by Sister Sledge.
When Judy Collins recorded
"Amazing Grace" in 1970, it
was a symbol of forgiveness, of
striving, and just emotional
and spiritual depth.
Renee Fleming, in terms of
opera, of course, is someone
who has made such a difference.
Music, in particular, can unite
so many people, and that we
are all joined by the sound of
life.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Makes
you want to listen to
every single one of them.
And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.